So we have been talking so
far only about function components.
That used to be a very interesting and
distinct word in the React world, and
we've moved so
far towards function components that we
don't even remember class components.
However, they are still there,
they're not deprecated,
and there is one use case as far as I
can tell where you can only do it with
a class component and
that is error boundaries.
So what happens if,
let's say our past.lazy.jsx had
an error with its API request and
it was an uncaught error.
It would just bubble up to the top
of the app and crash the app, right?
As you've seen several times happen in
our app where it just says, I give up,
the whole thing crashed, right?
There's a thing called error boundaries
that allow you to catch those errors and
prevent it from crashing your app, and
you can only do it with class components.
So I'm kind of taking this as a dual
opportunity to teach you error boundaries,
which frankly I don't really write
too much myself because there is
react-error-boundary, this component here.
Written by a member of the, I think he's
an ex-member of the React Core team.
I don't think Brian works
there anymore but he used to.
He made a component that
just does this for you.
So generally speaking I'm going to
recommend that you just use this and
not write them yourself
unless you need to.
That's not gonna stop me from teaching
you how to write it yourself,
though, and the reason being is I
want you to see a class component.
Cuz if you are gonna hop into a company
that's been writing React for a decade,
you're definitely gonna see some
class components laying around,
cuz this used to be the only
way to write React.
Function components are as a result of,
I don't know,
probably six years ago at this point where
they were very first introduced, right?
And over time they've become so
popular and hooks made it so
that you actually don't ever need
class components ever anymore.
Let's talk about class components.
Number one, no hooks,
cannot use hooks with class components.
Just kind of sear that in your brain
because you're gonna be tempted to but
you can't.
So for example if you made a custom
hook like use PizzaOfTheDay it is
not usable with a class component.
Now, you can kind of hack it, what you
do is you make a function component,
you run the hook, and then you pass it
into a class component as a prop, right?
So you can kind of cheat a little bit,
which you may need to, but
inside of a class component,
you can never use a hook.
>> Brian Holt: So there's no state,
there's no useState, there's no useEffect,
it has its own set of APIs for doing that.
>> Brian Holt: So
let's just start writing one,
I think that's probably kind
of the easiest way to do it.
I want you to make a new file here, and
it's gonna be called ErrorBoundary.jsx.
>> Brian Holt: Yeah, they're in this weird
state where they're not recommended,
but they're not deprecated.
And I don't really understand that.
Either just say we're gonna
maintain both of them or
say we're just deprecating one of them,
right?
I don't know, but
I'm not in charge, no one asked me.
So we're gonna import  from
"react" and we're going to do this thing,
say class ErrorBoundary extends Component.
Somewhere in chat right now, there's
a Java developer just getting really
excited, just pumped about
what we're doing here.
>> Student 1: [LAUGH]
>> Brian Holt: And everyone else is like,
what is going on, right?
And just down here at the bottom, we're
gonna export default, ErrorBoundary;.
I actually like class components, I don't
write them anymore because no one does.
But there actually used to be a React
function cuz you do like React.createClass
like this, and then you would give it
an object, it would look a lot like this.
This was the original way of writing
React years and years and years ago,
if you look at Complete Intro to React,
v2, right,
it's all taught with createClass,
this was my favorite API.
Don't tell anyone that,
this is just between you and me, but
I really liked that and I kinda miss it.
That Wolverine meme of him stroking
a picture, that's me and createClass.
I do that with the docs [LAUGH].
All right, so state =, we we're gonna
give it some amount of default state,
and by default it has no error.
By the way this is just a normal
ES6 class, or ES2015 class.
So nothing special here, this is just
React using JavaScript classes, okay?
It's got a weird thing
called a static method.
Again, if you're a Java developer,
you're just pumped about life,
you're just ready to roll here.
Everyone else is like, I don't understand,
why are you writing Java in my JavaScript?
>> Brian Holt: A static method,
so if you have a class here,
you can say
ErrorBoundary.getDerivedStateFrom and
it works directly on
the uninstantiated class, right?
As opposed to everything else
is an instance method, so
you have to say const eb
= new ErrorBoundary;.
And then if we have
something here like lol,
right, then you can call eb.lol, right?
It happens on the thing that you newed up,
whereas something that is static is called
directly on the uninstantiated class.
If you're looking at me like,
I don't know or care about the difference,
that`s acceptable, that's fine,
[LAUGH] but I just wanted to tell you
the difference of what static is, right?
The reason why they do this is because
when it hits an error, it's gonna
call this ErrorBoundary function so
that it can get the proper state of it,
because the thing is gonna be busted,
right, because it caught an error.
And so
it has to kind of rebuild itself, and
it does that with this
getDerivedStateFromError,
that's where it comes from.
So we're just gonna say
whenever it gets busted,
we just want to make sure that it
has this state in here of hasError,
we wanted that to be set to true, right?
There is no lol function, by the way.
So it's gonna go from having a state
of hasError: false to having
an error as true whenever it gets busted.
And then you're gonna run this
function called componentDidCatch,
it's gonna catch the error and info.
>> Brian Holt: And here, if you had
something like send to TrackJS or Sentry,
or something like that, you would
send it off and log your errors here.
I'm gonna show you this sophisticated
technology of where I log all of my
errors, which is console.
Console.error("ErrorBoundary caught
some stupid error",) I like my
tools to tell me that I'm dumb,
it motivates me, error, info, okay?
And then here's kind of the interesting
thing, every component, so
every React component,
class component has a render function.
Everything else is totally optional,
but it must have a render function,
and the render function is 95%
the same thing as just a normal React
component function body.
So here's where you're going
to return something, so,
if (this.state.hasError),
>> Brian Holt: Then
you're gonna return your error,
whatever you wanna show the user, right?
So you're gonna say something
like error-boundary
>> Brian Holt: <h2>Uh oh!</h2>,
<p>, there was
an error with this page.
And then we'll pull in a link.
Make sure we import that
as well from up at the top,
import  from
'@tanstack/react-router'.
We're gonna send this to just
the homepage and, click here,
>> Brian Holt: To go back to the home
page,
>> Brian Holt: Okay?
All right, so if you have this
ErrorBoundary wrapping your component,
what do you want it to
display if there is no error?
>> Brian Holt: You don't want it
to add anything of itself, right?
You just want it to just be a straight
on invisible passthrough, right?
So in that particular case,
instead of this one, rather,
you're gonna say return
this.props.children;.
It's not wrapping it or
anything like that,
it's just saying if I have
an ErrorBoundary around MyComponent,
or let's make it even simpler and
just say that an <h1> of,
>> Brian Holt: Something like this, right?
If there's no error, be invisible, right?
Don't show me anything right?
And that's what this does, this is just
saying, I'm an invisible path through,
do nothing, and then if this, for
whatever reason, has an error,
right, then display this.
Don't do anything with the children,
right,
just display this, and
then that's how that works, right?
Okay, that's it for an ErrorBoundary,
just a slight more on class components.
I showed you one of these,
they're called life cycle methods.
So before we had effects, right,
where you can kind of useEffect
to affect different parts of
the component life cycle.
This had very strict named
parts of the life cycle, so
you could do something like
componentDidMount, right?
And this would be like, when we do
useEffect and give it an empty array so
it only runs once, right?
That's what componentDidMount does, right?
Or componentWillUnmount, this is like
that returned function from a useEffect,
right, it runs once at the end.
Or if you wanted to do,
where is component,
there's componentShouldUpdate,
not the one I'm looking for,
componentDidUpdate, that's
what I'm looking for.
This is an effect that's rendering
again and again based on,
remember we were looking pizza size,
right,
where we were having it run every
time pizza size ran, right?
componentDidUpdate runs every
single time the component changes,
that the state changes, right?
The other thing I'll just
mention kind of briefly,
there's also a constructor, that's
also something that you should know.
If you ever have to do something when
the component is very first created,
you have to put in a constructor and
you have to pass this up to React.
And the way you do that is you pass it
to the super, the class that's above it,
which is the component.
So you take the props in and
you have to pass that to React,
that's what this super(props) things does.
Why I'm kind of grateful I
don't have to teach this
anymore is because you have
to learn a lot about this.
And if you've ever done
a JavaScript interview,
people love to talk about what this is,
right?
And really, the big problem
here is if I do something like,
let's call this function, I don't know,
celebrateError, okay,
and I say this.setState.
>> Brian Holt: celebrateError,
or something like that,
celebration,
>> Brian Holt: Okay, and
I wanna put this every time that you click
on this, onClick =(this.celebrateError).
>> Brian Holt: This is not gonna work yet,
which sucks, right, why?
Because, what is this here?
Your answer that question should be,
I don't know, Brian,
why are you asking me this question,
right?
And the answer, I think it's undefined or
something, right?
Or window, but
it's not what you would expect it to be.
So, you have to go do something
really silly like this.celebrateError
= this.celebrateError.bind(this), and
then this will actually bind the context
so that this will be correct.
Or you can get extra silly and
you can say celebrateError = function and
you have to use an arrow
function like this.
Now, why does this work?
It's because error functions, or
arrow functions, have a different,
context setting methodology
than normal functions.
Its lexical, I think is the term that they
use for it, or it's the other way around,
I can never keep them straight, but it's
where it's written, not where it's called.
Whereas these functions,
the context is set where it's invoked,
not where it's created.
Again, if you're looking at me like,
am I speaking Chinese?
I might be, I actually don't know,
right [LAUGH]?
But I'm just kind of trying to survey
the land of where the landmines are here.
And so just be aware that you have to get
kind of into the weeds of what this is.
I asked you to also see here
that I called this.setState,
this is a React functionality for
class components.
This doesn't exist, obviously,
on function components, but
this is what it uses instead of useState,
right?
You do this.setState, and
then you change the state, and
this will be a massive object
of all of the state, right?
As opposed to having a one hook for
every single piece of state that you have,
you got one big old object.
And so, for example, right here
you can see that I have hasError,
that's some state on here.
This won't overwrite it because it does
an object merge between the two, so
just be aware of that.
>> Brian Holt: Last thing here is if
you wanna reference the props here,
you just say console.log(this.props.lol),
whatever you would normally
get props here, right?
Instead, you just reference
them here under this.props.
>> Brian Holt: Okay, that's kind of
a whirlwind tour of class components,
enough hopefully that you kind
of get the lay of the land,
that if you have to use them,
you know where everything is.
I've kinda shown you the 95% of them,
beyond that,
everything's kind of the same between
class components and function components.
One more thing I was gonna show you,
I kind of referenced it earlier, but
let's say if we had to
use our custom hook here.
I would do something like
function EBWithHooks and
I would do something like const
potd = usePizzaOfTheDay and
then I would return (ErrorBoundary)
with,
>> Brian Holt: Something like this, right?
So you do all of the hooks above
it in a function component, and
then you pass them down into
the component that way.
>> Brian Holt: Kind of silly,
but it does work, right?
You can kind of use the tools and
compose them together.